---
layout: post
title:  "On Understanding Swift"
date:   2021-12-06 15:11:41 -0400
categories: blog
---

**Swift Development**

Apple introduced Swift as a programming language for writing macOS and iOS apps at the Apple Worldwide Developers Conference in 2014. In creating Swift, they wanted to develop a modern language that was easier to learn, read/write, and maintain.

Swift is considered a statically typed language. A statically typed language is a language that requires that variable types be declared before use. Statically typed languages perform type checking at compile time (in doing so, catching errors early, instead of finding them during execution). 

**Type Safety and Type Inference**

When compiling your code, Swift performs type checks on all declared constants and variables. If types are mismatched, Swift will flag them as errors and you won't be able to run your program.

For example, if part of your code expects an **Int**, you can't pass it a **String** or a **Boolean**.

Let’s declare a variable called aNumber that will be of type **Int**.

```
var aNumber: Int = 3
```

If we try to reassign the variable "aNumber" to something that is not an integer, we will get an error.

```
aNumber = "notANumber"
```

```
error: Swift App Development.playground:5:12: error: cannot assign value of type 'String' to type 'Int'
```

In Swift, whenever you define a constant or variable, you must either specify a type using a type annotation or assign it a value that the compiler can use to infer the type. The latter is known as type inference.

```var aNumber: Int = 3``` can also be expressed as ```var aNumber = 3```

Swift reads the value assigned to "aNumber" and determines its type.

**Named Types**

A named type is a type that can be given a particular name when it’s defined. **Int**, **String**, **Boolean**, **Double** are some of the most common named types found in Swift. They are considered named types because they are defined and implemented using structures. **Structures** are custom data types that combine one or more properties (declared as variables) into a single type. Properties represent the information about an instance of a structure. 

Consider the following example of a Pet structure with a name property:

```
struct Pet {
    var name: String
}
```

To use our custom data type Pet, we must initialize it by creating an instance of it. 

```
let myPet = Pet(name: “Lucky”)
```

After initialization, each instance of the structure inherits all the properties and features of the structure. 

```
let myOtherPet = Pet(name: “‘Whiskers”)
```

Using dot syntax, we can access the data stored in the “name” property of both instances of Pet. 

```
print(myPet.name)
print(myOtherPet.name)
```

Console output:

```
Lucky
Whiskers
```

In addition to having properties, structures can define methods to provide functionality and define initializers to set up the initial state. 

All of the aforementioned features can be found in **Classes**, a different Swift custom data type. 

Take the following class Distance with a "kilometer" property.

```
class FlightDistance {
    var miles: Double
}
```

We can create an instance of this class by assigning a value to the kilometer property.

```
let distanceFromNYToLA = Distance(miles: 2445.55)
```

But what if we had a distance value in kilometers and not miles? We would need to convert that value to miles before initializing an instance of our class. 

```
let kilometer = 3935.73122
let milesConversion = kilometer / 1.609344

let distanceFromNYToLA = Distance(miles: milesConversion)
```

We could run this conversion inside of our class with custom initializers.

```
class FlightDistance {
    var miles: Double

    init(miles: Double) {
        self.miles = miles
    }

    init(kilometers: Double) {
        kilometers / 1.609344
    }
}
```

In doing this, we’ve created a Distance class that can be initialized in both miles and kilometers.

In both structures and classes, you can add functionality by adding a method. A method is a function that’s assigned to a specific type.

```
class FlightDistance {
    var miles: Double

    init(miles: Double) {
        self.miles = miles
    }

    init(kilometers: Double) {
        kilometers / 1.609344
    }

    func flightLengthInHours() -> Double {
        // assuming all planes tragel at 580 mph
        return miles / 580
    }
}

let distance = FlightDistance(kilometer: 3935.74)
let hoursToFlyDistance = distance.flightLengthInHours()

print(hoursToFlyDistance)
```
Console output 

```
6.785
```

Every instance of the class FlightDistance would have access to the flightLengthInHours() method.

A couple of things to note about functions in Swift:

If a function returns something, the type of whatever it is returning must be explicitly declared in the function declaration. 

```
func flightLengthInHours() -> Double {
    // assuming all planes travel at 580 mph
    return miles / 580
}
```

In our example function flightLengthInHours(), we are returning the hours it would take to travel the set amount declared in the miles property. As that is very likely to be a decimal number, then we must declare that we are returning a value type **Double**.

What if we had access to our plane’s actual mph? We could pass that into flightLengthInHours() as a parameter to better determine the trip’s length.

Because Swift is statically typed, we must declare the type of the parameter(s) that are passed in to every function in addition to the name of the parameter. 

```
func flightLengthInHours(planeMph: Double) -> Double {
    return miles / planeMph
}
```

When invoking this method, we’d simply replace the type of the parameter with the value we want to use for the method.

```
let aTripsLength = flightLengthInHours(planeMph: 550)
```

**Optionals**

Sometimes a function doesn't return data. Swift uses **Optionals** to represent when a value may or may not be present. With an optional, either a value exists or it is **nil**.

Let's take the following PassportInfo structure. 

```
struct PassportInfo {
    var firstName: String
    var middleName: String
    var lastName: String
}
```

```
let hasMiddleName = PassportInfo(firstName: "John", middleName: "Appleseed", lastName: "Smith")
```

We are able to successfully create an instance of PassportInfo because our dummy person has a first, middle, and last name. But in real life, not everyone has a middle name.

```
let noMiddleName = PassportInfo(firstName: "Nadia", middleName: "", lastName: "Collado")
```

We could technically initialize "middleName" with an empty String, but that could create potential problems when checking if a "middleName" exists at all. The more accurate representation of "middleName" when one doesn't exist is nil. 

```
let noMiddleName = PassportInfo(firstName: "Nadia", middleName: nil, lastName: "Collado")
```

Unfortunately, the above instance throws an error. All instance properties must be set during initialization and you can't pass a nil value into the "middleName" parameter because it expects a **String** value. This is where optionals come in. By setting "middleName" as an optional, we give it the ability to either hold a value or not. Think of an optional as a box that, when opened, either contains an instance of the given type or nothing at all. You create an optional by adding a **?** to the type name

```
struct PassportInfo {
    var firstName: String
    var middleName: String?
    var lastName: String
}

let noMiddleName = PassportInfo(firstName: "Nadia", middleName: nil, lastName: "Collado")
```

To check whether or not an optional contains a value, Swift lets you "unwrap" the value by using the **force-unwrap operator**, **!**.

```
if hasMiddleName.middleName != nil {
    let existingMiddleName = hasMiddleName.middleName!
}
```

You can eliminate the need to check for nil by using optional binding. Swift unwraps the optional and assigns the value to a constant if the optional contains a value. 

```
if let unwrappedMiddleName = hasMiddleName.middleName {
    print("This person's middle name is \(unwrappedMiddleName))
} else {
    print("This person does not have a middle name.")
}
```






